# Welcome to team BioCharge!

People learn to walk as early as 6 months old. With that, walking is such an integral part of everyday life, and most people do not even consider the fact that they are actively walking from place to place. In order to walk from point A to point B, one must exert energy to move their muscles, and in turn, exert a downward force such that the reaction force and frictional forces propel them forward. Unfortunately, all of this energy is lost to their surroundings, typically as sound,heat, or through inelastic collisions. Our project aims to collect this otherwise wasted energy and convert it into something useful—a means to charge an individual’s phone.

Thanks to the invention of smartphones, virtually everyone today has and relies on a high-performance cellular device, whether it be to contact their family, friends, work colleagues, or even to browse the web, order an Uber, or use the GPS features to find directions. Smartphones are a fantastic tool, but they only work if they are charged. Many people carry portable chargers or wires to ensure that wherever they go their phones will stay charged. **BioCharge** aims to be a wearable device that passively charges a battery using the otherwise wasted energy from walking. This would mean that no additional work would be required by the user, besides equipping the device. In doing so, users can guarantee that just by walking, their phone may always have a charge.

## Our Approach

In order to gain a further understanding of the concept the group was modeling, an alpha prototype was created to show proof of concept that the idea would work. This was done by ordering 15 smaller sheets of piezoelectric material with individually wired connections to test the efficiency and power outputs of the materials before assembling the final product. The goal for the alpha prototype was to make it as cheap and simplistic as possible so the group could get a better understanding of how the material functioned as well as model what would later be developed into the final design.

The alpha prototype had several components which all were wired together to simulate the shoe design that was desired. The prototype consisted of a wooden base plate in which the piezoelectric material was attached to, a system of cardboard pieces taped on top of the piezo material to simulate the spring system in the final design allowing us to evenly apply pressure to all piezoelectric pieces without breaking them, an upper wooden plate which would sandwich the base plate and the piezoelectric, and a wired breadboard. The alpha prototype design can be seen in the figure below.

## Preparing for the Innovation Expo

After the end of phase 3 of the design process, the group decided to better utilize their assets by splitting the design into 2 seperate power generating modes. The team continued refining the piezoelectric based work done up to phase 3 by prioritizing both a scaling down in size and a scaling up in voltage ouput compared to what can be seen in the alpha prototype above. Another half of the team, during design phase 4, switched to investigate the power generation potential of electromagnetic induction systems, ultimately settling on developing an induction coil to be employed on the shoe alongside the piezoelectric harness system.  
  
From this point on, the team has worked together to test and integrate the 2 power modes; seperately at first but ultimately we aim to analyze the system as one unit. For the piezoelectric side of our beta prototype the team took a similar approach seen in the alpha prototype wherein the piezo pieces were wired together, this time in sets of 3 wired in series then wired into a rectifier that would convert the AC power developed into DC power for battery loading. The dynamic system surrounding the piezo pieces was also updated as the team cut circles out of pieces of wood board allowing the piezo pieces more room to bend and strain ultimately increasing each parts power potential. The pieces were also covered in felt on either side in order to further protect the fragile cermaics inside the piezoelectric parts. With 6 pieces on the board, 2 additional wooden plates were used to surround the apparatus and the whole unit was zip tied together. Ultimately the piezo portion of the product was able to produce vastly more voltage and through inserting an op amp the team intends to channel the additional voltage into usable power via boosting the current output. 

For the induction coil the team applied the research done over phase 4 to 3D print an induction coil stator through which the magnetic mover would be able to travel and produce power. The initial 3D print proved to be successful through a series of dynamic tests although the power output was challenging to measure. This has led the team to order a steel rod that will be machined to the same specs as the 3D print allowing us to test the output by soldering leads onto the part. Despite this issue, the overall size of the coil is only 3.23in. in length and 1.1in. in diameter meaning it will be easy to integrate into the piezoelectric apparatus detailed above. By chaining together and enhancing each power delivery mode sepertely the team is now moving forwards to finalize its design for the innovation expo.

## Our Website

Find out more about our progress on [our website](https://biocharge1870.github.io)! 